this is css in just five minutes i'll
explain css how i understand it
and the parts of it that i use the most
as a full stack developer
you can write css directly in html like
this or
this but it's best to use a css file
css just has two easy pieces selectors
and attributes
selectors say hey search my html for
elements that match
this you can select by element like h1
classes with a dot an id with a hash
or chain multiple together chaining with
a comma just means
select this and this the space syntax
means inside
of the carrot selects one level deep
that is headers just one level deep
inside that class
keeping your selectors as simple as
possible like a single class name
are the best case scenario once you've
got things selected you need to add some
attributes
now attributes are the actual styles we
apply and these styles get applied from
the top to the bottom of your css file
now it's not quite that simple because
what if we have two conflicting styles
well to resolve that there's something
called specificity more specific
selectors get priorities so it goes from
id
down to class down to broad elements
when you chain selectors together
it gets really complicated but you'll
get a feel for this over time
there are two really big categories
color and layout and then a ton of
different random properties
two common things we set color on are
backgrounds and text
we use the background hyphen color and
color keys
respectively and then fill in attribute
values like red
cornflower blue or sky blue these color
words are easy to read but limited so
more often you'll use a hex code
you can find colors you like around the
internet and then get the hex with a
color picker extension
now for layout attributes which is all
based on the box model
everything is a box inside of a box each
box is made up of content padding
border and margin i'll set some values
for these and then explain them
we can see the box model over in chrome
on any page which allows us to check the
values and debug if things are being
weird
the blue part is content which we set in
css as
width and height width and height are
best to set as percentages of the parent
container
otherwise everything gets messed up and
can go out of bounds
you can position things within this blue
content box with
text align center left or right the
padding attribute can throw people off
because
you can write either one two or four
values that's because you can set top
right bottom and left individually
or top and bottom left and right or all
four sides
if you're writing four remember by going
clockwise first top then right bottom
left you can also set aside individually
like so
margin top padding left you get it it's
important to know that your element's
background color
will get applied to padding but not
border margin we've set this padding
with pixel values but you can also make
it rem
or rem rem is relative to the base font
size so if you
change the base font size it will change
the spacing of
everything this can be useful for
responsive designs
next up border which is the border
between padding and margin and has a
three part syntax
size type and color 99 of the time
you're just going to be using solid for
the type
and the color rules work the same as for
other stuff finally margin which is on
the outside of our box
and works exactly the same as padding
with the one to four value
syntax our background color will not
extend into the margin
okay that's the box model next up the
display property
use inline for a continuous line and
block to space things out
or inline block if you still want the
benefits of both being able to set the
top and bottom
padding but still have the same line
display flex and grid deserve entire
videos of their own
you can specify an exact grid which is
great for building
based on a design or ux wireframe for
general purpose and spacing as you go
display flex is amazing and it's my
go-to
it's easy to center horizontally and
vertically with the align items and
justify content
properties you can put things in custom
places too by setting position relative
on the parent and absolute on the child
then we set the top left bottom and
right values which can also be
percentages
now back to selectors for a minute we
also have pseudo classes which you can
add with a colon
most common is probably hover which
works a bit like this
a different set of styles for when your
mouse is over the element and to make it
a smooth transition we can add the
transition property which takes the time
and bezier curve
value we can also make this button move
on hover with the extremely cool
transform property
there are other pseudo classes that
allow you to select an element kind of
like we were doing with the space and
carrot
a couple examples are first child and
child but again keep it simpler than
this whenever you can
we didn't cover font family or font size
but these are pretty self-explanatory
you'll always see more than one font for
font family just in case the first one
doesn't work
we did cover background color but you
can also set a ton more background
properties like background image
and you can use the shorthand background
syntax to put these all in one line
other cool attributes include shadows
like box shadow and drop shadow and
i usually use a box shadow or drop
shadow generator for this
you can play around with the options and
then just copy the css here
just google box shadow generator to find
this by the way you'll notice these
things called vendor prefixes
in front of the box shadow property
these are used for new or experimental
attributes that get added to css
at this point box shadow is not new at
all though so it's just for backwards
compatibility
with older browsers my rule of thumb is
to use them if they're included in the
documentation for that attribute
but otherwise just leave them out you
can create animations with keyframe and
the animation property and it's usually
better to just google css animation
and then whatever you want and you'll be
able to find one pretty easily
just like background animation has a
short hand property too
lastly we have media queries which allow
us to style for mobile and different
screen sizes
these are triggered by break points
which are kind of like if statements so
if the width is wider than a certain
amount of pixels
then the style gets applied and you can
use your browser developer tools to test
this out
okay what else is there with css well
you have preprocessors the common one is
scss or sas which gives you more syntax
variables nested
properties but it doesn't do anything
normal css can't finally in frameworks
like react you will see
css in javascript which is also called
a styled component pattern and the line
between
javascript css and html really gets
blurred here
don't worry too much about these styled
components are very similar to regular
css
and get converted to css at compile time
whether you're already a css pro or
you're just an inspiring front-end
developer
i hope this was a helpful summary of css
like if you learned something and if you
want to become a remote software
developer
subscribe for more content like this
you